@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU MDK Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file mdk.texi for copying conditions.

@node Getting started, Emacs tools, MIX and MIXAL tutorial, Top
@chapter Getting started
@cindex tutorial

In this chapter, you will find a sample code-compile-run-debug session
using the @sc{mdk} utilities. Familiarity with the MIX mythical computer
and its assembly language MIXAL (as described in Knuth's TAOCP) is
assumed; for a compact reminder, see @ref{MIX and MIXAL tutorial}.

@menu
* Writing a source file::       A sample MIXAL source file.
* Compiling::                   Using @code{mixasm} to compile source
                                files into binary format.
* Running the program::         Running and debugging your programs.
* Using mixguile::              Using the Scheme interpreter to run and
                                debug your programs.
* Using Scheme in mixvm and gmixvm::
@end menu

@node Writing a source file, Compiling, Getting started, Getting started
@section Writing a source file
@cindex MIXAL
@cindex source file
@cindex .mixal file

MIXAL programs can be written as ASCII files with your editor of choice.
Here you have the mandatory @emph{hello world} as written in the MIXAL
assembly language:

@example
*                                                        (1)
* hello.mixal: say 'hello world' in MIXAL                (2)
*                                                        (3)
* label ins    operand     comment                       (4)
TERM    EQU    19          the MIX console device number (5)
        ORIG   3000        start address                 (6)
START   OUT    MSG(TERM)   output data at address MSG    (7)
        HLT                halt execution                (8)
MSG     ALF    "MIXAL"                                   (9)
        ALF    " HELL"                                   (10)
        ALF    "O WOR"                                   (11)
        ALF    "LD   "                                   (12)
        END    START       end of the program            (13)
@end example

@noindent MIXAL source files should have the extension @file{.mixal}
when used with the @sc{mdk} utilities. As you can see in the above
sample, each line in a MIXAL file can be divided into four fields
separated by an arbitrary amount of whitespace characters (blanks and or
tabs). While in Knuth's definition of MIXAL each field must start at a
fixed pre-defined column number, the @sc{mdk} assembler loosens this
requirement and lets you format the file as you see fit. The only
restrictions retained are for comment lines (like 1-4) which must begin
with an asterisk (*) placed at column 1, and for the label field (see
below) which, if present, must also start at column 1. The four fields
in each non-comment line are:

@itemize @minus
@item
an optional label, which either refers to the current memory address (as
@code{START} and @code{MSG} in lines 7 and 9) or a defined symbol
(@code{TERM}) (if present, the label must always start at the first
column in its line, for the first whitespace in the line marks the
beginning of the second field),
@item
an operation mnemonic, which can represent either a MIX instruction
(@code{OUT} and @code{HLT} in lines 7 and 8 above), or an assembly
pseudoinstruction (e.g., the @code{ORIG} pseudoinstruction in line
6@footnote{If an @code{ORIG} directive is not used, the program will
be loaded by the virtual machine at address 0. @code{ORIG} allows
allocating the executable code where you see fit.}.
@item
an optional operand for the (pseudo)instruction, and
@item
an optional free text comment.
@end itemize

@noindent Lines 9-12 of the @file{hello.mixal} file above also show the
second (and last) difference between Knuth's MIXAL definition and ours:
the operand of the @code{ALF} pseudoinstruction (a word of five
characters) must be quoted using ""@footnote{In Knuth's definition,
the operand always starts at a fixed column number, and the use of
quotation is therefore unnecessary. As @code{mixasm} releases this
requirement, marking the beginning and end of the @code{ALF} operand
disambiguates the parser's recognition of this operand when it includes
blanks. Note that double-quotes (") are not part of the MIX character
set, and, therefore, no escape characters are needed within
@code{ALF}'s operands.}.

The workings of this sample program should be straightforward if you are
familiar with MIXAL. See TAOCP vol. 1 for a thorough definition or
@ref{MIX and MIXAL tutorial}, for a tutorial.

@node Compiling, Running the program, Writing a source file, Getting started
@section Compiling
@cindex compiling
@cindex binary programs
@cindex virtual machine
@cindex assembler
@cindex @code{mixasm}

Three simulators of the MIX computer, called @code{mixvm}, @code{gmixvm}
and @code{mixguile}, are included in the @sc{mdk} tools. They are able to
run binary files containing MIX instructions written in their binary
representation. You can translate MIXAL source files into this binary
form using @code{mixasm}, the MIXAL assembler. So, in order to compile
the @file{hello.mixal} file, you can type the following command at your
shell prompt:

@example
mixasm hello @key{RET}
@end example

@cindex .mix file

If the source file contains no errors, this will produce a binary file
called @file{hello.mix} which can be loaded and run by the MIX virtual
machine. Unless the @code{mixasm} option @code{-O} is provided, the
assembler will include debug information in the executable file (for a
complete description of all the compilation options, see
@ref{mixasm}). Now, your are ready to run your first MIX program, as
described in the following section.


@node Running the program, Using mixguile, Compiling, Getting started
@section Running the program
@cindex @code{mixvm}
@cindex non-interactive mode
@cindex interactive mode

MIX is a mythical computer, so it is no use ordering it from your
favorite hardware provider. @sc{mdk} provides three software simulators of
the computer, though. They are

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{mixvm}, a command line oriented simulator,
@item
@code{gmixvm}, a GTK based graphical interface to @code{mixvm}, and
@item
@code{mixguile}, a Guile shell with a built-in MIX simulator.
@end itemize

All three simulators accept the same set of user commands, but offer a
different user interface, as noted above. In this section we shall
describe some of these commands, and show you how to use them from
@code{mixvm}'s command line. You can use them as well at @code{gmixvm}'s
command prompt (@pxref{gmixvm}), or using the built-in Scheme primitives
of @code{mixguile} (@pxref{Using mixguile}).

Using the MIX simulators, you can run your MIXAL programs, after
compiling them with @code{mixasm} into binary @file{.mix}
files. @code{mixvm} can be used either in @dfn{interactive} or
@dfn{non-interactive} mode. In the second case, @code{mixvm} will load
your program into memory, execute it (producing any output due to
MIXAL @code{OUT} instructions present in the program), and exit when
it encounters a @code{HLT} instruction. In interactive mode, you will
enter a shell prompt which allows you issuing commands to the running
virtual machine. These commands will permit you to load, run and debug
programs, as well as to inspect the MIX computer state (register
contents, memory cells contents and so on).

@menu
* Non-interactive mode::        Running your programs non-interactively.
* Interactive mode::            Running programs interactively.
* Debugging::                   Commands for debugging your programs.
@end menu

@node Non-interactive mode, Interactive mode, Running the program, Running the program
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Non-interactive mode
@cindex non-interactive mode

To make @code{mixvm} work in non-interactive mode, use the @code{-r}
flag. Thus, to run our @file{hello.mix} program, simply type

@example
mixvm -r hello @key{RET}
@end example

@noindent at your command prompt, and you will get the following output:

@example
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
@end example

@noindent Since our hello world program uses MIX's device number 19 as
its output device (@pxref{Writing a source file}), the output is
redirected to the shell's standard output. Had you used any other MIX
output devices (disks, drums, line printer, etc.), @code{mixvm} would
have created a file named after the device used (e.g. @file{disk4.dev})
and written its output there@footnote{The device files are stored, by
default, in a directory called @file{.mdk}, which is created in your
home directory the first time @code{mixvm} is run. You can change this
default directory using the command @code{devdir} when running
@code{mixvm} in interactive mode (@pxref{Configuration commands})}.

The virtual machine can also report the execution time of the program,
according to the (virtual) time spent in each of the binary instructions
(@pxref{Execution times}). Printing of execution time statistics is
activated with the @code{-t} flag; running

@example
mixvm -t -r hello @key{RET}
@end example

@noindent
produces the following output:

@example
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
** Execution time: 11
@end example

Sometimes, you will prefer to store the results of your program in MIX
registers rather than writing them to a device. In such cases,
@code{mixvm}'s @code{-d} flag is your friend: it makes @code{mixvm} 
dump the contents of its registers and flags after executing the loaded
program. For instance, typing the following command at your shell's
prompt

@example
mixvm -d -r hello
@end example

@noindent you will obtain the following output:

@example
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
rA: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
rX: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
rJ: + 00 00 (0000)
rI1: + 00 00 (0000)     rI2: + 00 00 (0000)
rI3: + 00 00 (0000)     rI4: + 00 00 (0000)
rI5: + 00 00 (0000)     rI6: + 00 00 (0000)
Overflow: F
Cmp: E
@end example

@noindent which, in addition to the program's outputs and execution
time, gives you the contents of the MIX registers and the values of the
overflow toggle and comparison flag (admittedly, rather uninteresting in
our sample).

As you can see, running programs non-interactively has many
limitations. You cannot peek the virtual machine's memory contents, not
to mention stepping through your program's instructions or setting
breakpoints@footnote{The @code{mixguile} program allows you to execute
arbitrary combinations of @code{mixvm} commands (using Scheme)
non-interactively. @xref{Scheme scripts}.}. Enter interactive mode.

@node Interactive mode, Debugging, Non-interactive mode, Running the program
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Interactive mode
@cindex interactive mode

To enter the MIX virtual machine interactive mode, simply type

@example
mixvm @key{RET}
@end example

@noindent at your shell command prompt. This command enters the
@code{mixvm} command shell. You will be presented the following command
prompt:

@example
MIX >
@end example

@noindent The virtual machine is initialised and ready to accept your
commands. The @code{mixvm} command shell uses GNU's readline, so that
you have at your disposal command completion (using @key{TAB}) and
history functionality, as well as other line editing shortcuts common to
all utilities using this library (for a complete description of
readline's line editing usage, see @ref{Command Line
Editing,,,Readline}.)

@cindex @code{load}
Usually, the first thing you will want to do is loading a compiled MIX
program into memory. This is accomplished by the @code{load} command,
which takes as an argument the name of the @file{.mix} file to be
loaded. Thus, typing

@example
MIX > load hello @key{RET}
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
MIX >
@end example

@noindent will load @file{hello.mix} into the virtual machine's memory
and set the program counter to the address of the first instruction. You
can obtain the contents of the program counter using the command
@code{pc}:

@cindex @code{pc}
@example
MIX > pc
Current address: 3000
MIX >
@end example

@cindex @code{run}
After loading it, you are ready to run the program, using, as you surely
have guessed, the @code{run} command:

@example
MIX > run
Running ...
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
... done
Elapsed time: 11 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 11)
MIX >
@end example

@noindent Note that now the timing statistics are richer. You obtain the
elapsed execution time (i.e., the time spent executing instructions
since the last breakpoint), the total execution time for the program up
to now (which in our case coincides with the elapsed time, since there
were no breakpoints), and the total uptime for the virtual machine (you
can load and run more than one program in the same
session)@footnote{Printing of timing statistics can be disabled using
the command @code{timing} (@pxref{Configuration commands}).}. After
running the program, the program counter will point to the address after
the one containing the @code{HLT} instruction. In our case, asking the
value of the program counter after executing the program will give us

@example
MIX > pc
Current address: 3002
MIX >
@end example

@cindex @code{pmem}
@noindent You can check the contents of a memory cell giving its address
as an argument of the command @code{pmem}, like this

@example
MIX > pmem 3001
3001: + 00 00 00 02 05 (0000000133)
MIX >
@end example

@noindent
and convince yourself that address 3001 contains the binary
representation of the instruction @code{HLT}. An address range of the
form FROM-TO can also be used as the argument of @code{pmem}:

@example
MIX > pmem 3000-3006
3000: + 46 58 00 19 37 (0786957541)
3001: + 00 00 00 02 05 (0000000133)
3002: + 14 09 27 01 13 (0237350989)
3003: + 00 08 05 13 13 (0002118477)
3004: + 16 00 26 16 19 (0268542995)
3005: + 13 04 00 00 00 (0219152384)
3006: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
MIX >
@end example

@cindex @code{preg}
@noindent
In a similar manner, you can look at the contents of the MIX registers
and flags. For instance, to ask for the contents of the A register you
can type

@example
MIX > preg A
rA: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
MIX >
@end example

@cindex @code{help}
@noindent
Use the command @code{help} to obtain a list of all available commands,
and @code{help COMMAND} for help on a specific command, e.g.

@example
MIX > help run
run             Run loaded or given MIX code file. Usage: run [FILENAME]
MIX >
@end example

@noindent
For a complete list of commands available at the MIX propmt,
@xref{mixvm}. In the following subsection, you will find a quick tour
over commands useful for debugging your programs.

@node Debugging,  , Interactive mode, Running the program
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Debugging commands

@cindex @code{next}
The interactive mode of @code{mixvm} lets you step by step execution of
programs as well as breakpoint setting. Use @code{next} to step through
the program, running its instructions one by one. To run our
two-instruction @file{hello.mix} sample you can do the following:

@example
MIX > load hello
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
MIX > pc
Current address: 3000
MIX > next
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
Elapsed time: 1 /Total program time: 1 (Total uptime: 1)
MIX > pc
Current address: 3001
MIX > next
End of program reached at address 3002
Elapsed time: 10 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 11)
MIX > pc
Current address: 3002
MIX > next
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
Elapsed time: 1 /Total program time: 1 (Total uptime: 12)
MIX >
MIX > run
Running ...
... done
Elapsed time: 10 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 22)
MIX >
@end example
@noindent
(As an aside, the above sample also shows how the virtual machine
handles cumulative time statistics and automatic program restart).

@cindex @code{sbpa}
@cindex breakpoints

You can set a breakpoint at a given address using the command
@code{sbpa} (set breakpoint at address). When a breakpoint is set,
@code{run} will stop before executing the instruction at the given
address. Typing @code{run} again will resume program execution. Coming
back to our hello world example, we would have:

@example
MIX > sbpa 3001
Breakpoint set at address 3001
MIX > run
Running ...
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
... stopped: breakpoint at line 8 (address 3001)
Elapsed time: 1 /Total program time: 1 (Total uptime: 23)
MIX > run
Running ...
... done
Elapsed time: 10 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 33)
MIX >
@end example

@cindex @code{sbp}
@cindex breakpoints
@noindent
Note that, since we compiled @file{hello.mixal} with debug info
enabled, the virtual machine is able to tell us the line in the
source file corresponding to the breakpoint we are setting. As a
matter of fact, you can directly set breakpoints at source code lines
using the command @code{sbp LINE_NO}, e.g.

@example
MIX > sbp 4
Breakpoint set at line 7
MIX >
@end example

@noindent
@code{sbp} sets the breakpoint at the first meaningful source code line;
thus, in the above example we have requested a breakpoint at a line
which does not correspond to a MIX instruction and the breakpoint is set
at the first line containing a real instruction after the given one. To
unset breakpoints, use @code{cbpa ADDRESS} and @code{cbp LINE_NO}, or
@code{cabp} to remove all currently set breakpoints. You can also set
conditional breakpoints, i.e., tell @code{mixvm} to interrupt program
execution whenever a register, a memory cell, the comparison flag or the
overflow toggle change using the commands @w{@code{sbp[rmco]}}
(@pxref{Debug commands}).

@cindex @code{psym}
MIXAL lets you define symbolic constants, either using the @code{EQU}
pseudoinstruction or starting an instruction line with a label (which
assigns to the label the value of the current memory address). Each
MIXAL program has, therefore, an associated symbol table which you can
inspect using the @code{psym} command. For our hello world sample, you
will obtain the following output:

@example
MIX > psym
START:  3000
TERM:  19
MSG:  3002
MIX >
@end example

Other useful commands for debugging are @code{strace} (which turns on
tracing of executed instructions), @code{pbt} (which prints a backtrace
of executed instructions) and @code{weval} (which evaluates
w-expressions on the fly). For a complete description of all available
MIX commands, @xref{mixvm}.

@node Using mixguile, Using Scheme in mixvm and gmixvm, Running the program, Getting started
@section Using @code{mixguile}

With @code{mixguile} you can run a MIX simulator embedded in a Guile
shell, that is, using Scheme functions and programs. As with
@code{mixvm}, @code{mixguile} can be run both in interactive and
non-interactive modes. The following subsections provide a quick tour on
using this MIX emulator.

@menu
* The mixguile shell::          Using the Scheme MIX virtual machine.
* Additional functions::        Scheme functions accessing the VM.
* Defining new functions::      Defining your own Scheme functions.
* Hook functions::              Using command and break hook functions.
* Scheme scripts::
@end menu

@node The mixguile shell, Additional functions, Using mixguile, Using mixguile
@subsection The @code{mixguile} shell
@cindex Scheme
@cindex @code{mixguile}
@cindex REPL

If you simply type

@example
mixguile @key{RET}
@end example
@noindent
at the command prompt, you'll be presented a Guile shell prompt like
this

@example
guile>
@end example
@noindent
At this point, you have entered a Scheme read-eval-print loop (REPL)
which offers you all the Guile functionality plus a new set of built-in
procedures to execute and debug MIX programs. Each of the @code{mixvm}
commands described in the previous sections (and in @pxref{mixvm}) have
a Scheme function counterpart named after it by prepending the prefix
@code{mix-} to its name. Thus, to load our hello world program, you can
simply enter

@example
guile> (mix-load "hello")
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
guile>
@end example
@noindent
and run it using @code{mix-run}:

@example
guile> (mix-run)
Running ...
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
... done
Elapsed time: 11 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 11)
guile>
@end example
@noindent
In the same way, you can execute it step by step using the Scheme
function @code{mix-next} or set a breakpoint:

@example
guile> (mix-sbp 4)
Breakpoint set at line 5
guile>
@end example
@noindent
or, if you one to peek at a register contents:

@example
guile> (mix-preg 'A)
rA: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
guile>
@end example

You get the idea: you have at your disposal all the @code{mixvm} and
@code{gmixvm} commands by means of @code{mix-} functions. But, in case
you are wondering, this is only the beginning. You also have at your
disposal a whole Scheme interpreter, and you can, for instance, define
new functions combining the @code{mix-} and all other Scheme
primitives. In the next sections, you'll find examples of how to take
advantage of the Guile interpreter.

@node Additional functions, Defining new functions, The mixguile shell, Using mixguile
@subsection Additional MIX Scheme functions

The @code{mix-} function counterparts of the @code{mixvm} commands don't
return any value, and are evaluated only for their side-effects
(possibly including informational messages to the standard output and/or
error stream). When writing your own Scheme functions to manipulate the
MIX virtual machine within @code{mixguile} (@pxref{Defining new
functions}), you'll probably need Scheme functions returning the value
of the registers, memory cells and so on. Don't worry: @code{mixguile}
also offers you such functions. For instance, to access the (numerical)
value of a register you can use @code{mix-reg}:

@example
guile> (mix-reg 'I2)
0
guile>
@end example
@noindent
Note that, unlike @code{(mix-preg 'I2)}, the expression @code{(mix-reg
'I2)} in the above example evaluates to a Scheme number and does not
produce any side-effect:

@example
guile> (number? (mix-reg 'I2))
#t
guile> (number? (mix-preg 'I2))
rI2: + 00 00 (0000)
#f
guile>
@end example

In a similar fashion, you can access the memory contents using
@code{(mix-cell)}, or the program counter using @code{(mix-loc)}:

@example
guile> (mix-cell 3000)
786957541
guile> (mix-loc)
3002
guile>
@end example

Other functions returning the contents of the virtual machine components
are @code{mix-cmp} and @code{mix-over}, which eval to the value of the
comparison flag and the overflow toggle respectively. For a complete
list of these additional functions, @xref{mixguile}.

In the next section, we'll see a sample of using these functions to
extend @code{mixguile}'s functionality.

@node Defining new functions, Hook functions, Additional functions, Using mixguile
@subsection Defining new functions
@cindex Scheme functions

Scheme is a powerful language, and you can use it inside @code{mixguile}
to easily extend the MIX interpreter's capabilities.  For example, you
can easily define a function that loads a file, prints its name,
executes it and, finally, shows the registers contents, all in one shot:

@example
guile> (define my-load-and-run  @key{RET}
         (lambda (file)   @key{RET}
           (mix-load file)   @key{RET}
           (display "File loaded: ")   @key{RET}
           (mix-pprog)   @key{RET}
           (mix-run)   @key{RET}
           (mix-preg)))   @key{RET}
guile>
@end example
@noindent
and use it to run your programs:

@example
guile> (my-load-and-run "hello")
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
File loaded: hello.mix
Running ...
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
... done
Elapsed time: 11 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 33)
rA: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
rX: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
rJ: + 00 00 (0000)
rI1: + 00 00 (0000)	rI2: + 00 00 (0000)
rI3: + 00 00 (0000)	rI4: + 00 00 (0000)
rI5: + 00 00 (0000)	rI6: + 00 00 (0000)
guile>
@end example


Or, maybe, you want a function which sets a breakpoint at a specified
line number before executing it:

@example
guile> (define my-load-and-run-with-bp
         (lambda (file line)
           (mix-load file)
           (mix-sbp line)
           (mix-run)))
guile> (my-load-and-run-with-bp "samples/primes" 10)
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
Breakpoint set at line 10
Running ...
... stopped: breakpoint at line 10 (address 3001)
Elapsed time: 1 /Total program time: 1 (Total uptime: 45)
guile>
@end example

As a third example, the following function loads a program, runs it and
prints the contents of the memory between the program's start and end
addresses:

@example
guile> (define my-run
         (lambda (file)
           (mix-load file)
           (let ((start (mix-loc)))
             (mix-run)
             (mix-pmem start (mix-loc)))))
guile> (my-run "hello")
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
Running ...
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
... done
Elapsed time: 11 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 11)
3000: + 46 58 00 19 37 (0786957541)
3001: + 00 00 00 02 05 (0000000133)
3002: + 14 09 27 01 13 (0237350989)
guile>
@end example


As you can see, the possibilities are virtually unlimited. Of course,
you don't need to type a function definition each time you start
@code{mixguile}. You can write it in a file, and load it using Scheme's
@code{load} function. For instance, you can create a file named, say,
@file{functions.scm} with your definitions (or any Scheme expression)
and load it at the @code{mixguile} prompt:

@example
guile> (load "functions.scm")
@end example

Alternatively, you can make @code{mixguile} to load it for you. When
@code{mixguile} starts, it looks for a file named @file{mixguile.scm} in
your MDK configuration directory (@file{~/.mdk}) and, if it exists,
loads it before entering the REPL. Therefore, you can copy your
definitions in that file, or load the @file{functions.scm} file in
@file{mixguile.scm}.

@node Hook functions, Scheme scripts, Defining new functions, Using mixguile
@subsection Hook functions
@cindex hook function
@cindex pre-hook
@cindex post-hook

Hooks are functions called before or after a given event occurs. In
@code{mixguile}, you can define command and break hooks, which are
associated, respectively, with command execution and program
interruption events. The following sections give you a tutorial on using
hook functions within @code{mixguile}.

@menu
* Command hooks::
* Break hooks::
@end menu

@node Command hooks, Break hooks, Hook functions, Hook functions
@subsubsection Command hooks

In the previous section, we have seen how to extend @code{mixguile}'s
functionality through the use of user defined functions. Frequently,
you'll write new functions that improve in some way the workings of a
built-in @code{mixvm} command, following this pattern:

@enumerate a
@item
Prepare the command execution
@item
Execute the desired command
@item
Perform post execution operations
@end enumerate

We call the functions executed in step (a) @dfn{pre-hook}s, and those of
step @dfn{post-hook}s of the given command. @code{mixguile} lets you
specify pre- and post-hooks for any @code{mixvm} command using the
@code{mix-add-pre-hook} and  @code{mix-add-post-hook} functions, which
take as arguments a symbol naming the command and a function to be
executed before (resp. after) the command. In other words,
@code{mixguile} will execute for you steps (a) and (c) above whenever
you eval (b). The hook functions must take a single argument, which is a
string list of the command's arguments. As an example, let us define the
following hooks for the @code{next} command:

@example
(define next-pre-hook
  (lambda (arglist)
    (mix-slog #f)))

(define next-post-hook
  (lambda (arglist)
    (display "Stopped at line ")
    (display (mix-src-line-no))
    (display ": ")
    (display (mix-src-line))
    (newline)
    (mix-slog #t)))
@end example
@noindent
In these functions, we are using the function @code{mix-slog} to turn
off the informational messages produced by the virtual machine, since we
are providing our own ones in the post hook function. To install these
hooks, we would write:

@example
(mix-add-pre-hook 'next next-pre-hook)
(mix-add-post-hook 'next next-post-hook)
@end example
@noindent
Assuming we have put the above expressions in @code{mixguile}'s
initialisation file, we would obtain the following results when
evaluating @code{mix-next}:

@example
guile> (mix-next)
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
Stopped at line 6:             HLT
guile>
@end example

As a second, more elaborate, example, let's define hooks which print
the address and contents of a cell being modified using @code{smem}. The
hook functions could be something like this:

@example
(define smem-pre-hook
  (lambda (arglist)
    (if (eq? (length arglist) 2)
        (begin
          (display "Changing address ")
          (display (car arglist))
          (newline)
          (display "Old contents: ")
          (display (mix-cell (string->number (car arglist))))
          (newline))
        (error "Wrong arguments" arglist))))

(define smem-post-hook
  (lambda (arglist)
    (if (eq? (length arglist) 2)
        (begin
          (display "New contents: ")
          (display (mix-cell (string->number (car arglist))))
          (newline)))))
@end example
@noindent
and we can install them using

@example
(mix-add-pre-hook 'smem smem-pre-hook)
(mix-add-post-hook 'smem smem-post-hook)
@end example
@noindent
Afterwards, a sample execution of @code{mix-smem} would look like this:

@example
guile> (mix-smem 2000 100)
Changing address 2000
Old contents: 0
New contents: 100
guile>
@end example

@cindex global hook

You can add any number of hooks to a given command. They will be
executed in the same order as they are registered. You can also define
global post (pre) hooks, which will be called before (after) any
@code{mixvm} command is executed. Global hook functions must admit two
arguments, namely, a string naming the invoked command and a string list
of its arguments, and they are installed using the Scheme functions
@code{mix-add-global-pre-hook} and @code{mix-add-global-post-hook}. A
simple example of global hook would be:

@example
guile> (define pre-hook
         (lambda (cmd args)
           (display cmd)
           (display " invoked with arguments ")
           (display args)
           (newline)))
guile> (mix-add-global-pre-hook pre-hook)
ok
guile> (mix-pmem 120 125)
pmem invoked with arguments (120-125)
0120: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
0121: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
0122: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
0123: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
0124: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
0125: + 00 00 00 00 00 (0000000000)
guile>
@end example

Note that if you invoke @code{mixvm} commands within a global hook, its
associated command hooks will be run. Thus, if you have installed both
the @code{next} hooks described earlier and the global hook above,
executing @code{mix-next} will yield the following result:

@example
guile> (mix-next 5)
next invoked with arguments (5)
slog invoked with arguments (off)
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
Stopped at line 7: MSG         ALF   "MIXAL"
slog invoked with arguments (on)
guile>
@end example

Adventurous readers may see the above global hook as the beginning of a
command log utility or a macro recorder that saves your commands for
replay.

@node Break hooks,  , Command hooks, Hook functions
@subsubsection Break hooks

@cindex break hook

We have seen in the previous section how to associate hooks to command
execution, but they are not the whole story. You can also associate hook
functions to program interruption, that is, specify functions that
should be called every time the execution of a MIX program is stopped
due to the presence of a breakpoint, either explicit or
conditional. Break hooks take as arguments the line number and memory
address at which the break occurred. A simple hook that logs the line
and address of the breakpoint could be defined as:

@example
(define break-hook
  (lambda (line address)
    (display "Breakpoint encountered at line ")
    (display line)
    (display " and address ")
    (display address)
    (newline)))
@end example
@noindent
and installed for explicit and conditional breakpoints using

@example
(mix-add-break-hook break-hook)
(mix-add-cond-break-hook break-hook)
@end example
@noindent
after that, every time the virtual machine encounters a breakpoint,
@code{break-code} shall be evaluated for you@footnote{You may have
noticed that break hooks can be implemented in terms of command hooks
associated to @code{mix-run} and @code{mix-next}. As a matter of fact,
they @emph{are} implemented this way: take a look at the file
@file{@emph{install_dir}/share/mdk/mix-vm-stat.scm} if you are curious.}.

@node Scheme scripts,  , Hook functions, Using mixguile
@subsection Scheme scripts
@cindex Scheme script
@cindex non-interactive

Another useful way of using @code{mixguile} is writing executable
scripts that perform a set of commands for you. This is done using the
@code{mixguile} switch @code{-s} (being a Guile shell, @code{mixguile}
accepts all the command options of @code{guile}; type @code{mixguile -h}
for a list of all available command options). For instance, if you have
a very useful MIX program @file{foo.mix} which you want to run often,
you don't have to fire up a MIX virtual machine, load and run it every
time; you can write a Scheme script instead:

@example
#! /usr/bin/mixguile -s
!#
;;; runprimes: execute the primes.mix program

;; load the file you want to run
(mix-load "../samples/primes")
;; execute it
(mix-run)
;; print the contents of registers
(mix-pall)
;; ...
@end example

Just save the above script to a file named, say, @file{runtest}, make it
executable (@code{chmod +x runtest}), and, well, execute it from the
Unix shell:

@example
$ ./runtest
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
Running ...
... done
Elapsed time: 190908 /Total program time: 190908 (Total uptime: 190908)
rA: + 30 30 30 30 30 (0511305630)
rX: + 30 30 32 32 39 (0511313959)
rJ: + 47 18 (3026)
rI1: + 00 00 (0000)     rI2: + 55 51 (3571)
rI3: + 00 19 (0019)     rI4: + 31 51 (2035)
rI5: + 00 00 (0000)     rI6: + 00 00 (0000)
Overflow: F
Cmp: L
$
@end example

Note that this is far more flexible that running programs
non-interactively using @code{mixvm} (@pxref{Non-interactive mode}), for
you can execute any combination of commands you want from a Scheme
script (not just running and dumping the registers). For additional
@code{mixguile} command line options, see @ref{Invoking mixguile}.

@node Using Scheme in mixvm and gmixvm,  , Using mixguile, Getting started
@section  Using Scheme in @code{mixvm} and @code{gmixvm}
@cindex @code{scmf}

In the previous section (@pxref{Using mixguile}) we have seen how the
Guile shell @code{mixguile} offers you the possibility of using Scheme
to manipulate a MIX virtual machine and extend the set of commands
offered by @code{mixvm} and @code{gmixvm}. This possibility is not
limited to the @code{mixguile} shell. Actually, both @code{mixvm} and
@code{gmixvm} incorporate an embedded Guile interpreter, and can
evaluate Scheme expressions. To evaluate a single-line expression at the
@code{mixvm} or @code{gmixvm} command prompt, simply write it and press
return (the command parser will recognise it as a Scheme expression
because it is parenthesized, and will pass it to the Guile
interpreter). A sample @code{mixvm} session using Scheme expressions
could be:

@example
MIX > load hello
Program loaded. Start address: 3000
MIX > (define a (mix-loc))
MIX > run
Running ...
MIXAL HELLO WORLD
... done
Elapsed time: 11 /Total program time: 11 (Total uptime: 11)
MIX > (mix-pmem a)
3000: + 46 58 00 19 37 (0786957541)
MIX > (mix-pmem (mix-loc))
3002: + 14 09 27 01 13 (0237350989)
MIX >
@end example

You can also load and evaluate a file, using the @code{scmf}
command like this:

@example
MIX> scmf /path/to/file/file.scm
@end example

Therefore, you have at your disposal all the @code{mixguile} goodies
described above (new functions, new command definitions, hooks...)
inside @code{mixvm} and @code{gmixvm}. In other words, these programs
are extensible using Scheme. See @ref{Using mixguile} for examples of
how to do it.

