@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU MDK Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2006
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file mdk.texi for copying conditions.

@node mixasm, mixvm, Emacs tools, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter @code{mixasm}, the MIXAL assembler
@cindex @code{mixasm}
@cindex MIXAL
@cindex assembler

MIX programs, as executed by @code{mixvm}, are composed of binary
instructions loaded into the virtual machine memory as MIX
words. Although you could write your MIX programs directly as a series
of words in binary format, you have at your disposal a more friendly
assembly language, MIXAL (@pxref{MIXAL}) which is compiled into binary
form by @code{mixasm}, the MIXAL assembler included in @sc{mdk}. In this
chapter, you will find a complete description of @code{mixasm} options.

@menu
* Invoking mixasm::
@end menu

@node Invoking mixasm,  , mixasm, mixasm
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Invoking @code{mixasm}

In its simplest form, @code{mixasm} is invoked with a single argument,
which is the name of the MIXAL file to be compiled, e.g.

@example
mixasm hello
@end example

@noindent
will compile either @file{hello} or @file{hello.mixal}, producing a
binary file named @file{hello.mix} if no errors are found.

In addition, @code{mixasm} can be invoked with the following command
line options (note, that, following GNU's conventions, we provide a long
option name for each available single letter switch):

@example
mixasm [-vhulO] [-o OUTPUT_FILE] [--version] [--help] [--usage]
       [--ndebug] [--output=OUTPUT_FILE] [--list[=LIST_FILE]] file
@end example

@noindent
The meaning of these options is as follows:

@defopt -v
@defoptx --version
Prints version and copyleft information and exits.
@end defopt

@defopt -h
@defoptx --help
@defoptx -u
@defoptx --usage
Prints a summary of available options and exits.
@end defopt

@defopt -O
@defoptx --ndebug
Do not include debugging information in the compiled file, saving
space but disallowing breakpoint setting at source level and symbol
table inspection under @code{mixvm}.
@end defopt

@defopt -o output_file
@defoptx --output=output_file
By default, the given source file @var{file.mixal} is compiled into
@var{file.mix}. You can provide a different name for the output file
using this option.
@end defopt

@defopt -l
@defoptx @w{--list[=list_file]}
@cindex .mls file
This option causes @code{mixasm} to produce, in addition to the
@file{.mix} file, an ASCII file containing a summary of the compilation
results. The file is named after the MIXAL source file, changing its
extension to @file{.mls} if no argument is provided; otherwise, the
listing file is named according to the argument.
@end defopt
