@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU MDK Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2009, 2013, 2014, 2015
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file mdk.texi for copying conditions.

@node Acknowledgments, Installing MDK, Introduction, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@unnumbered Acknowledgements

Many people have further contributed to @sc{mdk} by reporting problems,
suggesting various improvements, or submitting actual code. Here is a
list of these people. Please, help me keep it complete and exempt of
errors.

@itemize @bullet
@item Philip Ellis King
provided MIXAL test programs pinpointing bugs in the first @sc{mdk}
release, and useful discussions as well. Philip has also contributed
with the Emacs port of @code{mixvm} and influenced the @code{gmixvm} GUI
design with insightful comments and prototypes.

@item Aleix Conchillo
has been following @sc{mdk}'s development for many years, indefatigably
chasing and fixing bugs, and suggesting many improvements. He's also the
original author of the Fink and Macports ports.

@item Pieter E J Pareit
is the author of the Emacs MIXAL mode, and has also contributed many
bug fixes.

@item Michael Scholz
is the author of the German translation of @sc{mdk}'s user interface.

@item Sergey Poznyakoff
provided patches to mixlib/mix_scanner.l improving MIXAL compliance.

@item Sergey Litvin
implemented the instructions @code{SLB}, @code{SRB}, @code{JAE},
@code{JAO}, @code{JXE}, and @code{JXO} from volume 2 of TAOCP.

@item Francesc Xavier Noria
kindly and thoroughly reviewed the @sc{mdk} documentation, providing
insightful advice.

@item Eric S. Raymond
contributed the documentation file @file{MIX.DOC} and the samples
@file{elevator.mixal} and @file{mistery.mixal} from his MIXAL package.

@item Nelson H. F. Beebe
has tested @sc{mdk} in a lot of Unix platforms, suggesting portability
enhancements to the source code.

@item Ryan Schmidt, Agustin Navarro, Ying-Chieh Liao, Adrian Bunk, Baruch Even, and Ronald Cole
ported @sc{mdk} to different platforms, and created and/or maintain
packages for it.

@item Jason Uhlenkott, Andrew Hood, Radu Butnaru, Ruslan Batdalov, WeiZheng, Sascha Wilde, Michael Vernov and Xiaofeng Zhao
reported bugs and suggested fixes to them.

@item Joshua Davies, Eli Bendersky, Milan Bella and Jens Seidel reported bugs on the documentation.

@item Christoph von Nathusius, Stephen Ramsay  and Johan Swanljung
tested @sc{mdk} on different platforms, and helped fixing the configuration
process in them.

@item Richard Stallman
suggested various improvements to the documentation and has always
kept an eye on each @sc{mdk} release.

@item @sc{mdk} was inspired by Darius Bacon's
@uref{http://www.accesscom.com/@/~darius/, MIXAL program}.

@end itemize
